JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: And I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
tonight:
President Obama weighs in on the
presidential
campaign, as Donald Trump's feud
with the
Khan family has more Republicans
distancing
themselves from their party
nominee.
GWEN IFILL: Also ahead this
Tuesday: controlling
Zika in the United States.
The CDC issues an unprecedented
warning urging
pregnant women to stay away from
a Miami neighborhood
where the virus is spreading.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And debating the
math myth
-- why one college professor
says advanced
math classes are not only
unnecessary, but
harmful.
ANDREW HACKER, Professor
Emeritus, Queens
College: We immediately plunge
people into
geometry and algebra.
And, as a result, Americans are
really quite
illiterate in terms of numbers.
GWEN IFILL: All that and more on
tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: A presidential
broadside today
aimed at Donald Trump.
President Obama took on the man
who is running
to succeed him in his strongest
terms yet.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
I think the Republican nominee
is unfit to
serve as president.
I said so last week, and he
keeps on proving
it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The rebuke came
at a news conference
with the visiting prime minister
of Singapore.
The president drew a sharp
distinction between
Donald Trump and the Republican
nominees he
had faced, John McCain and Mitt
Romney.
BARACK OBAMA: I never thought
that they couldn't
do the job.
And had they won, I would have
been disappointed,
but I would have said to all
Americans, they
are -- this is our president and
I know they
are going to abide by certain
norms and rules
and common sense, will observe
basic decency.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All of this
followed Trump's
repeated criticisms of Khizr and
Ghazala Khan,
parents of a U.S. army officer
who died in
Iraq.
Republican leaders condemned the
remarks,
but Mr. Obama said that's not
enough.
BARACK OBAMA: This is daily and
weekly where
they are distancing themselves
from statements
he's making.
There has to be a point at which
you say,
this is not somebody I can
support for president
of the United States.
JUDY WOODRUFF: One New York
Republican congressman,
Richard Hanna, did just that
today.
In a newspaper opinion
columnist, he wrote:
"Mr. Trump has attacked the
parents of a slain
U.S. soldier.
Where do we draw the line?
While I disagree with her on
many issues,
I will vote for Hillary
Clinton."
Trump was speaking in Northern
Virginia as
the president held his news
conference, and
he made no mention of the Obama
criticism
or the Khans.
But it was in the air just the
same.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
A man came up to me and he
handed me his Purple
Heart.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Purple Heart,
given to
those wounded or killed in
action, came from
a retired lieutenant colonel.
DONALD TRUMP: I always wanted to
get the Purple
Heart.
This was much easier.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Later, Trump did
answer the
president in a statement,
charging he and
his former secretary of state
betrayed American
security and American workers.
And Trump declared -- quote --
"Hillary Clinton
has proven herself unfit to
serve in any government
office."
Trump supporters at the rally
appeared unfazed
by the latest blowup.
WOMAN: The coverage is just
insane.
I think they make a big deal
about that.
First of all, he was speaking
from his heart.
And he wasn't accusing them or
saying anything.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Trump moves on to
campaign
in Florida tomorrow.
Clinton will be in Colorado.
Also today, Donald Trump told
The Washington
Post he is not ready to endorse
Republican
House Speaker Paul Ryan for
reelection.
He also said he won't support
Republican Senators
John McCain and Kelly Ayotte for
new terms.
GWEN IFILL: In the day's other
news: The president
also made a renewed pitch for
the Trans-Pacific
Partnership, the trade deal he's
pushing in
the face of growing opposition.
Both presidential candidates
oppose it, but
Mr. Obama warned against trying
to pull back
on trade, and away from
globalization.
BARACK OBAMA: To try to pull up
a drawbridge
on trade would only hurt us and
hurt our workers.
So, the answer is to make sure
that globalization
and trade is working for us, not
against us.
And TPP is designed to do
precisely that.
GWEN IFILL: The president also
played down
Russia's possible role in
hacking the Democratic
National Committee's e-mails.
He said it only adds to an
already long list
of differences.
JUDY WOODRUFF: There's more
fallout from those
Democratic Party e-mails that
showed staffers
favoring Hillary Clinton and
disparaging Bernie
Sanders.
The Associated Press reports the
DNC's chief
executive has resigned, and two
other staffers
also quit today.
Party chair, Congresswoman
Debbie Wasserman
Schultz, resigned last week.
GWEN IFILL: In Syria, rebels
accused government
forces of a new chemical weapons
attack today.
They say a helicopter dropped
barrels of toxic
gas in Idlib province, near
where a Russian
helicopter was shot down Monday;
33 people
were affected.
Video posted on social media
showed victims
being treated with oxygen, but
it's unclear
what kind of gas was used.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Thousands of
mourners in Normandy,
France, attended a funeral mass
today for
a murdered Catholic priest.
Father Jacques Hamel had his
throat cut by
Islamic State militants last
week.
Today, an archbishop led a
solemn public ceremony
inside the Rouen Cathedral to
pay tribute
to the cleric.
He was later buried in a private
service.
GWEN IFILL: The death toll has
climbed past
90 across India, after a week of
monsoon flooding.
A million other people have been
forced to
flee.
The flooding has caused heavy
damage across
three states in the northern and
eastern parts
of the country.
It follows two straight years of
widespread
drought.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Back in the U.S.,
New York
City Police Commissioner Bill
Bratton is stepping
down.
He led the nation's largest
force in the 1990s,
and returned to the position in
2014.
He said today he's leaving at a
time of extreme
tensions between police and
minorities, but
said he's confident in the
department's future.
WILLIAM BRATTON, New York City
Police Commissioner:
The mistrust of the criminal
justice system,
particularly by our minority
communities,
the immigration issues that are
so paramount
at the moment, the anger
directed at our Muslim
community, we, I believe, in New
York City
at this time are better prepared
than anyplace
else in America.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Bratton has been
hailed for
cutting crime, but criticized
over incidents
of alleged excessive force by
police.
James O'Neill, currently the New
York City
department's top chief, will
take over as
commissioner.
GWEN IFILL: And Wall Street
slipped on lackluster
auto sales and falling oil
prices.
The Dow Jones industrial average
lost 90 points
to close at 18313.
The Nasdaq fell 46 points, and
the S&P 500
gave up 13.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Still to come on
the "NewsHour":
Florida's fight to contain the
Zika virus;
the back-story to Donald Trump's
latest comments
on Ukraine; an advocate for
teaching more
practical mathematics; and much
more.
GWEN IFILL: In Florida, workers
went door
to door today to check for
mosquitoes, and
to spray in neighborhoods, in
the hope of
clamping down on the Zika virus.
Officials say 15 people have
become infected
in Miami's Wynwood neighborhood,
and it's
believed these are the first
mosquito-transmitted
cases in the mainland U.S.
The CDC says the mosquitoes are
proving harder
to eradicate than expected.
For an on-the-ground look, I'm
joined by Alina
Hudak, the deputy mayor of
Miami-Dade County.
Thank you for joining us.
We know now of 15 locally
transmitted case
of Zika infections.
How many more are likely, and
are you prepared
to handle an increase?
ALINA HUDAK, Deputy Mayor,
Miami-Dade County,
Florida: Gwen, thank you for the
opportunity
to speak tonight to you and to
your viewers.
I would like to clarify first
and foremost
that the confirmed cases in
Miami-Dade County
are 12.
I want to reiterate and really
just be very
clear about our mosquito control
program here
in Miami-Dade County.
We have a very strong and
aggressive program
that we have had in place since
1935.
We have many years of a proven
track record
in managing and controlling
disease.
We work together with our
Department of Health,
with the Department of
Agriculture.
We have had consultations with
the CDC, and
they are working very closely
with us.
So we feel very confident that
this can be
contained and it can be
contained to a very
small area.
I want the viewers to understand
that we're
talking about one square mile in
a community
that is over 2,000 square miles,
and I think
that's important for context and
for people
to understand exactly the area
that we're
talking about.
GWEN IFILL: Why is it confined
so far to this
one area, Wynwood, which
contains an art district
and attracts people from outside
of the neighborhood?
Why there?
ALINA HUDAK: You know, I
certainly would be
speculating relative to that.
We have a high international
presence there
and a lot of travel in that
community.
It is unknown exactly how it is
that the transmission
takes place, and obviously there
is a lot
of focus on the mosquito, but
there are many
unknowns about this disease.
And, you know, quite frankly, we
have been
able to isolate at this point
these particular
cases, in consultation with the
Department
of Health.
Our crews have been there every
single day,
and have been on the ground
since day one.
The moment that a suspected case
is identified,
our crews are there.
They do inspection.
They do treatment.
And we have, again, a very
aggressive program.
In addition to that, we have a
very aggressive
outreach program to our
residents, and we're
communicating with our residents
regularly
about the part and the role that
they play
in being our partner with this.
We want our...
(CROSSTALK)
GWEN IFILL: And pardon me.
What are you asking them to do?
ALINA HUDAK: We're asking our
residents to
look in their backyards, to
drain any standing
water.
We're asking our residents and
our visitors
to wear repellent.
I heard someone today in a
meeting describe
it as you leave your house in
the morning
in Miami and you put on
sunscreen.
Put on insect repellent and help
us and be
preventive and do your part in
preventing
the spread of this disease.
GWEN IFILL: For months now,
there has been
a discussion about this, that it
was going
to spread, that it was going to
come to the
U.S., that there were going to
be transmissions
that began and ended here.
Why could this not have been
avoided?
ALINA HUDAK: Well, you know, I
would say to
that we have disease in the
world for millions
of years, and that we have
mosquitoes in the
world for millions of years.
We -- again, since February,
when our governor
declared a public health
concern, an emergency,
our program, you know, continues
to do all
of the things that we do on a
regular basis,
not only in responding to
service requests
from our community, but in
working with the
Department of Health and making
sure that
at any point that there was a
suspicion of
a case, that we were out in that
particular
area, in that region, that we do
inspections
and that we do treatment.
So, there has been and there
continues to
be a very aggressive mosquito
control program...
(CROSSTALK)
ALINA HUDAK: ... the mosquito.
GWEN IFILL: Pardon me again.
How do you encourage caution?
Like you said, put on sunscreen
and put on
the repellent.
How do you encourage that
without inducing
panic?
ALINA HUDAK: Well, we have
several methods
by which we do that.
Our mayor has blessed and
authorized us to
spend whatever we need to spend
to be able
to do the appropriate outreach.
And he personally has been -- he
has hosted
media briefings.
We have hosted a variety of
media opportunities
to get the message out to the
community.
We have information on our Web
site.
We have information on all of
our municipalities'
Web sites.
We have our code enforcement
personnel in
the community.
We have done direct mailing to
our community.
We work very closely with our
local media
to be sure that that message is
being given
to the public, and we provide
information
to any civic organization, any
organization
that wants the information.
And we're making sure that that
message -- and
to everyone who is listening
today, please
put on your insect repellent if
you're living
in Florida.
I can tell you that I personally
was in the
-- I was in the Wynwood area
this afternoon.
It is a beautiful community.
And it is a place that I love to
go to with
my family.
And I go often.
And I am planning to go.
I have family visiting from
Pennsylvania next
week.
And I intend to take them there
for lunch
or dinner.
GWEN IFILL: OK.
Deputy Mayor Alina Hudak of
Miami-Dade County,
thank you very much.
ALINA HUDAK: Thank you.
GWEN IFILL: Tonight, we launch a
new election
year series, Candidates in
Context.
GWEN IFILL: Tonight, we launch a
new election
year series, Candidates in
Context.
Between now and Election Day, we
will strive
to go beyond the headlines to
explain what's
happening and why.
Lisa Desjardins kicks it off
with a closer
look at Donald Trump's recent
statements on
Russia and Ukraine.
LISA DESJARDINS: First, here's
what Donald
Trump said.
It was over the weekend about
Ukraine and
Russian President Vladimir
Putin.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
You know, I have my own ideas.
He's not going into Ukraine, OK,
just so you
understand.
He is not going to go into
Ukraine.
All right?
You can mark it down, you can
put it down,
you can take it any way you
want.
GEORGE STEPHANOPOULOS, ABC News:
He is already
there, isn't he?
DONALD TRUMP: Well, he is there
in a certain
way, but I'm not there.
You have Obama there.
LISA DESJARDINS: Critics point
out Vladimir
Putin and Russia are in Ukraine
now.
Let's look at some facts.
We're talking about two critical
areas, Crimea
on the Black Sea, and the
Donbass region in
Eastern Ukraine.
First, Crimea.
In 1991, as the Soviet Union
dissolved, Ukraine
and Russia became separate
nations.
Voters in Crimea were split, but
they voted
54 percent for Ukrainian
independence.
Tensions built, protests
erupted, and, in
2014, Ukrainians pushed out a
pro-Russian
government in Kiev.
In Crimea, unidentified forces,
no flags on
their uniform, fomented an
uprising and a
referendum going the other way,
in favor of
Russia.
Then Russia annexed Crimea, with
international
outcry, but little bloodshed.
Meanwhile, in the Donbass
region, war broke
out, as militant separatists
took over towns
and fought Ukrainian government
forces.
That's a war that continues
today.
The key question, what was
Russia's role?
We know Russian troops stationed
in Crimea
did seize key positions there,
and Russia
confirmed that it sent soldiers
on intelligence
missions in Donbass.
The Ukrainian government says
Russia has done
far more, sending more soldiers
and weapons.
So, this brings us back to Mr.
Trump.
Here is his clarification on his
words that
Putin isn't going into Ukraine
from a speech
yesterday.
DONALD TRUMP: But a couple of
papers said,
Donald Trump doesn't realize
that the Crimea
was already taken.
I know it exact -- two years
ago, approximately,
OK, approximately?
It was taken during Obama's
watch.
LISA DESJARDINS: In other words,
Trump argues
that he knew about Crimea, but
he wasn't talking
about Crimea when he spoke of
Putin and Ukraine.
That is notable.
It would be a profound shift in
U.S. policy.
The Obama administration sees
Crimea and Eastern
Ukraine as sovereign parts of
Ukraine, and
accuses Putin of violating
international law.
It's a sharp turn in policy, as
is something
else Trump said last week.
He was asked if he'd remove U.S.
sanctions
against Russia.
His answer?
DONALD TRUMP: We will be looking
at that,
yes.
We will be looking.
LISA DESJARDINS: And that is a
change from
where Trump was in 2014, when he
said this
about punishing Russia over
Ukraine:
DONALD TRUMP: We should
definitely bee strong.
We should definitely do
sanctions, and we
have to show some strength.
LISA DESJARDINS: One final piece
of context
about Trump's campaign chairman,
Paul Manafort.
Manafort advised the campaigns
of Viktor Yanukovych,
the pro-Russian leader of
Ukraine, who was
deposed in 2014.
Manafort has said he was pushing
Western interests.
As we look closely at the
candidate's words,
the Trump campaign insist Mrs.
Trump's overall
belief is that the U.S. should
be less involved
in the entire region.
Lisa Desjardins for the "PBS
NewsHour."
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now a look at how
required
math classes may factor into the
academic
success or failure of high
school and college
students.
Hari Sreenivasan has the story
as part of
our weekly education series,
Making the Grade.
ANDREW HACKER, Professor
Emeritus, Queens
College: Words and numbers, we
use them both.
We use them for different
reasons.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Even if you
aren't going
to be an engineer, getting
through high school
or college means getting through
math.
MICHAEL GENAO, Student: Why do
we need to
take all these math classes?
It's not necessary.
It's not needed for what we are
actually learning.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Andrew Hacker,
the college
professor teaching at the front
of this classroom
at New York's Queens College,
agrees.
ANDREW HACKER: The goal is to
have everybody
do a full menu of mathematics,
up to and including
calculus.
And I don't see any rational
reason for this
at all.
What I'm suggesting is that at
least there
should be other options,
alternatives, instead
of this rigid math curriculum
for everyone.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Minimum
requirements for
math are different across the
country, but
many states today demand getting
through the
quadratic equations and two
years of algebra
to graduate high school, and
most college
degrees also require some math
credits.
Hacker writes about this
perceived disconnect
between academic requirements
and the everyday
needs of graduates in his recent
book, "The
Math Myth."
ANDREW HACKER: It's actually
several myths.
One of the myths is that every
one of us is
going to have to know algebra,
geometry, trigonometry
in the 21st century, because
that's the way
a high-tech age is going.
It's a total myth.
At most, 5 percent of people
really use math,
advanced math, in their work.
HARI SREENIVASAN: You're also
drawing a distinction
in your book between mathematics
and arithmetic.
Explain that.
ANDREW HACKER: Yes.
We use math, the term,
indiscriminately.
I think we teach arithmetic
really very well
up through grades, let's say,
five or six.
We do it.
But then, instead of continuing
with arithmetic
to what I would call adult
arithmetic, or
sophisticated arithmetic, we
immediately plunge
people into geometry and
algebra.
And, as a result, Americans are
really quite
illiterate in terms of numbers.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Hacker's
alternative?
Teaching what he calls numeracy.
ANDREW HACKER: It's income per
hour, essentially,
per person.
Is Norway well ahead of the
United States?
OK.
Let's continue with that.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Where he
focuses on developing
his students' mathematical
literacy by giving
them some real-world perspective
on the subject.
ANDREW HACKER: How to read a
corporate report,
how to look at the federal
budget, how to
parse the numbers on the
campaign trail, how
votes are cast, and how many
seats are won,
all sorts of assignments like
this, which
only require arithmetic, but
adult arithmetic.
HARI SREENIVASAN: A political
scientist by
training, Hacker and his
assertions have predictably
put college and high school math
departments
across the country on the
defensive.
DIANE BRIARS, President,
National Council
of Teachers of Mathematics: We
need algebra
as a basic way of making sense
of our world.
Many mathematical relationships
are described
using algebra.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Diane Briars
is president
of the National Council of
Teachers of Mathematics.
We chatted with her on nearly
her home turf,
the National Museum of
Mathematics in Manhattan.
DIANE BRIARS: Algebra gives us a
way of representing
relationships in general, so
that we can reason
about them in the general case,
instead of
specific cases.
Algebraic equations and
expressions are also
ways of describing patterns that
we may see
and differences between those
patterns.
ANDREW HACKER: This is put about
by the mathematicians.
I think they have to say this:
Mathematics
trains the mind.
There's no evidence for this
whatever.
Mathematics trains the mind for
mathematics.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Hacker thinks
math is a
powerful divider of high school
success.
A number of students succeed and
move onward,
while a sizable fraction do not.
ANDREW HACKER: One out of every
five of our
citizens has not finished high
school.
We have a 20 percent dropout
rate.
It's one of the highest in the
developed world.
And the chief academic reason
for this dropout
rate is algebra in the ninth
grade.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The fail rate
is something
Diane Briars doesn't dispute.
DIANE BRIARS: The fact that
failing algebra
I as a ninth grader is -- makes
a student
more likely to drop out is a
huge problem
that the mathematics education
community is
actively engaged in.
One of the ways we're addressing
that is by
building a stronger foundation
in K-8 mathematics.
With a more solid conceptual
understanding
in K-8 mathematics, students are
going to
be much better prepared to be
successful in
algebra I.
HARI SREENIVASAN: But Hacker
says the math
failure is greater than just
high school.
ANDREW HACKER: Forty-seven
percent of people
who start a four-year college do
not get a
degree.
That's a very high dropout rate,
close to
half.
Chief academic reason, freshman
math course,
which people fail and don't make
up.
And why don't we ask ourselves,
look at the
talent we're losing.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Why are the
institutions
in high school and in college
structured the
way they are to emphasize math,
as we do today?
ANDREW HACKER: Here's the big
word I always
hear: Let's be rigorous, the big
R. Let's
be rigorous, so let's make
everybody coming
into community college pass a
stiff algebra
test.
That shows how rigorous we are.
Same thing at a higher level.
If you take Princeton, Stanford,
Yale, they
want virtually all of their
incoming students,
except for athletes and a few
alumni children,
to have an SAT score on math of
at least 700.
That's very high.
That's the top 7 percent.
Why?
We're Princeton, we're rigorous.
And in the name of rigor, we
have this irrational
math barrier.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Diane Briars
agrees with
that too, but only up to a
point.
DIANE BRIARS: You can argue
that, for some
of them, that requirement may
have been put
there to ensure that they filter
people out.
On the other hand, being able to
be facile
with symbols and equations is
necessary for
a number of trades.
For example, the electricians
union has passing
a course in algebra I as a
requirement for
an apprenticeship program.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So both sides
agree that
the formula for the right amount
of math isn't
optimal.
Figuring out the right equation
may be one
of the first major problems for
new graduates
everywhere.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Hari
Sreenivasan
in New York.
GWEN IFILL: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": a
Midwest mayor's
plans to build trust between
police and her
community; and the troubles
still plaguing
Rio just days before the opening
ceremony.
But, first: a report on the
Bakken oil fields
in North Dakota, where
employment and the
economy are directly affected by
the price
of oil.
Oil prices have dropped since
their peak in
2014, and drilling has slowed,
idling rigs
and sending the once booming
economy into
uncertainty.
Inside Energy's Emily Guerin
takes us on a
tour of Oil Bust Alley, a short
stretch of
highway where the boom and bust
of the oil
industry plays out.
EMILY GUERIN: I have spent two
years reporting
on the Bakken oil field in North
Dakota.
I have seen it when it was
booming, back in
2014, and now, when it's
busting.
There's one highway in the oil
field town
of Dickinson, Highway 22, where
you can see
the entire boom and bust story.
So we're going on a road trip
through Oil
Bust Alley to see what we can
learn in this
five-mile stretch of road about
how a community
changes when the price of oil
crashes.
Let's start with the obvious
losers: businesses
directly involved in the
drilling and production
of oil.
So, I'm standing in front a
field of stacked
drilling rigs.
There's about 27 back there.
We just counted.
And that's actually about the
same amount
that are actively drilling for
oil in North
Dakota.
Two years ago, when the price of
oil was high,
there were over 180.
And it's really a sign of how
much things
have slowed down here in the oil
field.
Every time a drilling rig gets
idled, about
120 people lose their jobs,
people like Kaley
Haugen's husband, who worked on
a drilling
rig for over a decade before
being laid off
last year.
Haugen has also seen a huge
impact of the
slowdown on her business, the
Uniform Unit,
which is right on Highway 22.
KALEY HAUGEN, Uniform Unit: We
do uniforms
for a variety of industries.
We do flame-resistant clothing
for the oil
and gas industry, as well as
electrical.
We do scrubs, medical uniforms,
and then we
also have brought in tactical
for EMS management
services.
EMILY GUERIN: The Uniform Unit
just opened
last spring, right as oil prices
were tanking.
KALEY HAUGEN: If we would've
been operating
two years ago, three years ago,
I would bet
90 percent of our business would
have been
oil field.
Now I would say we're pretty
even within the
different fields.
I mean, I would say 30 percent
oil fields,
30 percent tactical, 30 percent
scrubs, so
definitely different than I
thought.
EMILY GUERIN: Hotels have also
been hit hard
by the slowdown.
Over 1,000 new hotel rooms were
built in Dickinson
in the past 12 years.
Connie Hank and Bill Evans
manage and do maintenance
in three of those hotels just
off Highway
22.
BILL EVANS, Maintenance Worker:
When I got
here in March of '14, there were
no vacancies.
If somebody checked out, you
already had somebody's
name who was waiting on that
room.
CONNIE HANK, Manager: You
would've been paying
$80 a night for a single and
almost -- just
about $100 for a double.
That was cheap.
And now you can get a room for
$32 a night.
That's a big change.
BILL EVANS: Drastic.
EMILY GUERIN: Now their three
hotels are at
less than 30 percent occupancy.
They end up with a lot of time
on their hands.
CONNIE HANK: I'm sitting here
waiting, praying
that a car pulls into my parking
lot.
And that was the truth.
We look like a bunch of
vultures.
The minute they walked in the
door, it was
like, hey, thank you for coming
here, you
know?
EMILY GUERIN: Just down the
highway, there
are signs that other parts of
the housing
market are also hurting.
So, coming up, there's a man
camp graveyard.
It's just a field full of
trailers that are
just like jumbled together,
almost piled on
top of each other, because
people don't have
a need to house these workers
anymore because
they have laid off so many of
their employees.
The slowdown in the oil field
hasn't been
uniformly bad.
Custom cabinet manufacturer TMI
Systems had
25 percent growth last year.
That means they need a lot of
new workers.
General manager Tom Krank says a
few years
ago, the cost of living was high
in Dickinson
due to the housing shortage
brought on by
the influx of oil workers.
TOM KRANK, General Manager, TMI
Systems: With
the rents where they were at, it
was tough
to even attract people with
that, because
even though we had good wages,
the rents beyond
where they could justify moving
out here to
work for us.
EMILY GUERIN: But now there's no
longer a
labor shortage.
There are far more applicants
than job openings.
And rental prices are dropping.
So TMI Systems is having no
trouble hiring.
TOM KRANK: As time went on, the
oil field
layoffs got deeper and deeper,
and pretty
soon we started seeing some of
our former
employees coming back.
EMILY GUERIN: Scott Weiand is
one of them.
He worked at TMI for 21 years
before leaving
in 2012 load crude oil onto rail
cars.
SCOTT WEIAND, Installer, TMI
Systems: For
me, I was looking for a
challenge, possibly
a little higher pay.
Obviously, that's an attraction
for people.
But with the slowdown in the oil
business,
I wanted to look for other
opportunities.
And one of the first things in
mind for me
was TMI.
EMILY GUERIN: The slowdown is
also benefiting
the local government.
Dickinson City Administrator
Shawn Kessel
says hiring is easier and
expenses are lower,
because they no longer have to
compete with
higher oil field salaries.
But on the downside, the oil
bust has sent
tax revenue tumbling.
SHAWN KESSEL, Dickinson City
Administrator:
We have lost about $1.5 million
into our general
fund.
That's a big hit to the general
Our general fund is about $16
million.
So to lose 1.5 out of that fund
causes you
to be creative.
EMILY GUERIN: Creative.
If I have learned anything
covering the oil
field, it's that oil booms and
busts force
communities, individuals and
businesses to
be creative.
Take this Taco Bell right on
Highway 22.
WOMAN: Take your order when
you're ready.
EMILY GUERIN: Hi.
Can I get an order of nachos,
please?
They couldn't hire or retain
workers during
the boom because it was so easy
to get a higher-paying
job.
So they decided to triage.
For a while, only their
drive-through was
open.
You couldn't go inside.
Now they're fully staffed again.
As we headed out of town, we
drove past the
drilling rig graveyard one last
time.
For Kessel, those idled rigs are
actually
a sign that the oil industry
hasn't given
up on North Dakota.
SHAWN KESSEL: What that means
is, when they
stack them like that, they can
respond quickly
when things change.
When that price goes up, they
can just simply
move it from that rig yard to
wherever that
their is on the wells that they
want to invest
in next.
EMILY GUERIN: Like many people
in Western
North Dakota, Kessel wants the
oil activity
to come back, just not quite as
crazy as last
time.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Emily Guerin,
reporting from Highway 22 in
Dickinson, North
Dakota.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tonight, police
officers across
the country are heading out in
their neighborhoods
to talk to citizens, part of an
effort called
National Night Out.
This summer has been marked in
places by shootings
and heated tensions between law
enforcement
and those they serve.
But there are cities leading the
way to improve
things.
As part of our Race Matters
conversation focusing
on solutions, special
correspondent Charlayne
Hunter-Gault reports from Gary,
Indiana.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: Karen
Marie Freeman-Wilson
became native of her native
Gary, Indiana,
after three attempts.
High on her list of priorities
was improving
relations between the police and
the predominantly
black community, not great in a
town with
high unemployment dating back to
the steel
mill closures in the '70s, in
addition to
a history of police brutality
and crime.
But Mayor Freeman-Wilson is
starting to change
Gary, and we sat down with the
mayor to discuss
her solutions.
Mayor Freeman-Wilson, thank you
for joining
us.
How high on your list of
priorities was police-community
relations?
KAREN MARIE FREEMAN-WILSON,
Mayor of Gary,
Indiana: Well police-community
relations was
very high on my list, because
public safety
was one of the greatest concerns
in our community.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: Why?
KAREN MARIE FREEMAN-WILSON: We
had a very
high and still have a high
murder rate.
We had and have a high rate of
crime, even
though it's gone down.
A lot has to do with the fact
that there's
frustration associated with not
having employment,
with not having adequate income,
with poverty.
And as a result of that, people
tend to be
angry or angrier.
And as a result of that anger,
you will find
that people resort to violence
sometimes.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: But at
the time that
you took office, there was real
conflict between
the community and the police.
What was the biggest problem
that you had
to deal with there?
KAREN MARIE FREEMAN-WILSON:
Well, there was
distrust of the police.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: Why?
KAREN MARIE FREEMAN-WILSON:
Residents often
thought that perhaps the police
were involved
in illegal activity, or, more
often, didn't
care about what happened in
neighborhoods.
There's a big gulf in between
the fact that
some of our police officers do
not live in
the city, and, as a result of
them not living,
that they didn't understand what
was happening
in the neighborhoods.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: So, what
did you do?
KAREN MARIE FREEMAN-WILSON:
Well, we became
involved in the national
initiative on building
police and community trust, an
initiative
out of the John Jay College of
Criminal Justice,
as well as other organizations,
Yale University,
the National Institute of
Justice, and other
research organizations, that
really look at
ways to build police and
community trust.
And so they come in, they talk
to members
of the community.
They provide training for the
police department.
Our police officers have all
gone through
implicit bias training.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: What's
that?
KAREN MARIE FREEMAN-WILSON:
That's training
to really check your biases, to
ask you to
look at the way that you look at
other people.
So, do I look at you and think a
certain thing?
And how does that impact the way
that I interact
with you?
So, as a police officer, do I
look at an African-American
male, whether I am an
African-American male
or not, and think a certain
thing, and as
a result act a certain way
towards that person?
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: So, what
would you
say is the result of that?
KAREN MARIE FREEMAN-WILSON: What
we have found
is that police listen to the
community more,
the community listens to our
police officers
more.
There's more positive
interaction.
We have also found that there's
more of an
effort to interact when it's not
-- when a
crisis is not occurring.
And so, in August, we will have
our National
Night Out, when the community
comes out on
an evening.
And the police, fire, and other
departments
of the city get together.
But it's really focused on
public safety and
the fact that you can go out
after dark, you
can interact after dark in a
positive way.
The police bring their canine
units out.
And young people will get a
chance to interact
with the canine.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: And not
be bitten
by them.
KAREN MARIE FREEMAN-WILSON: And
not be bitten
by them.
It's a positive thing.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: What's
the complexion
of your police department?
And does that matter?
KAREN MARIE FREEMAN-WILSON:
About 55 percent
of our police department is
African-American.
Another 35 to 40 percent is
Caucasian.
And the remaining officers are
Latino.
And that absolutely does matter.
I think it's important that
young African-American
children see police officers,
see people in
authority that look like them.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: What you
have achieved
here sounds pretty good.
It actually sounds very good.
Is it applicable in other
circumstances in
other cities?
KAREN MARIE FREEMAN-WILSON: I
believe that
the solution is really for the
police to establish
a rapport with the community
that doesn't
necessarily involve an official
interaction.
Sometimes, it's midnight
basketball.
Other, times it's some type of
youth league.
Sometimes, it's an explorers
program, where
you are recruiting young people
to be involved
with the police.
Other times, it's just
neighborhood forums
or neighborhood meetings where
you help people
to keep their community safe.
When you know the officers, then
you're less
inclined to think that they are
there to harass
you.
And when you know the community,
you will
understand that the overwhelming
-- overwhelming
number of citizens are really
law-abiding
people.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: And you
mentioned
earlier the fact that your
murder rate is
going down.
What do you attribute that to?
KAREN MARIE FREEMAN-WILSON: We
attribute the
reduction in the murder rate to
the fact that
we have now focused on those
most likely to
be involved in criminal
activity.
And so there was a time when we
were just
doing sweeps.
I think a lot of people call it
broken window
policing.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: Yes,
city of Gary.
KAREN MARIE FREEMAN-WILSON: And
so everybody
would get stopped.
You might get stopped.
I might get stopped.
And there might be positive
results in terms
of being able to detect a crime,
or there
might not.
Now we focus on those who are
most likely
to be involved in criminal
behavior.
And we send them not just a
punitive message,
but we send them a message that
we would like
to see you become productive,
law-abiding
citizens.
We want to support you in that
effort, but
if you choose to continue in the
road of crime,
if you continue to be involved
in non-productive
behavior, we will hold you
accountable for
that.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: And when
do you tell
them that?
KAREN MARIE FREEMAN-WILSON:
Well, we focus
on those individuals who are on
probation
and parole.
And we conduct what they refer
to as call-ins.
And so these call-ins are
meetings.
They're meetings that involve
the community,
meetings that involve
individuals on probation
and parole.
And essentially what we tell
them is, we want
to help you, we want to support
you, but we
also want peace and safety in
this community,
and that the killing has to
stop.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: Well,
Mayor Freeman-Wilson,
thank you for joining us.
KAREN MARIE FREEMAN-WILSON:
Thank you.
GWEN IFILL: With the Summer
Olympics set to
open in Brazil later this week,
big questions
remain about whether Rio de
Janeiro is ready,
and whether it can get
completely ready in
time.
Jeffrey Brown has our look.
JEFFREY BROWN: The governor
recently declared
a state of public calamity.
City waterways are fouled and
filled with
bacteria, streets are clogged
with traffic,
and transportation projects
aren't finished.
And beyond the Olympics,
political chaos,
as President Dilma Rousseff
awaits an impeachment
trial.
Days before the start of the
Olympic Games,
we look at the state of play in
Brazil with
NPR's Rio de Janeiro-based Lulu
Garcia-Navarro,
Alex Cuadros, author of the book
"Brazillionaires,"
a look at wealth and inequality
in Brazil
in the decade leading up to the
Olympics,
and Paulo Sotero, director of
the Brazil Institute
at the Woodrow Wilson
International Center
for Scholars in Washington, D.C.
Welcome to all of you.
Lulu Garcia-Navarro, let me
start with you.
How prepared or unprepared is
Brazil for these
Games?
And how are people that you're
talking to
feeling about the Games just
before they start?
LULU GARCIA-NAVARRO, National
Public Radio:
I mean, I think it's undeniable
that it's
been very bumpy, just starting
with the athletes
and the Olympic Village.
Half of them couldn't move in.
They had to send in an army of
repairmen to
fix basic infrastructure
questions like electricity
and plumbing.
And we have seen a lot of other
complaints,
just today in the media village,
some of the
reporters complaining about the
lack and quality
of food.
So it has been very bumpy.
If you speak to ordinary
Brazilians, they
are not surprised by the
problems, but they
are definitely disappointed.
JEFFREY BROWN: And just to stay
with you a
moment, even today, we heard of
reports of
huge amounts of traffic, 70-mile
backups there
in Rio.
Have you experienced some of
that?
LULU GARCIA-NAVARRO: I have.
I mean, Rio is always a
challenging city to
move around in.
It's a city with huge mountains
and poor infrastructure.
Add to that the fact that you
have dedicated
lanes now that are for Olympic
transportation,
buses and cars for the IOC
members.
And that's meant that just
people who are
moving around the city in
regular vehicles
have had to face enormous
amounts of traffic.
Getting from Copacabana to the
main Olympic
venues, which are about 20 miles
away, took
me about two-and-a-half a hours
the other
day.
So, it is a challenge.
JEFFREY BROWN: Alex Cuadros, the
promise was
that these Games, of course,
would benefit
Brazilians beyond the Olympics,
right, that
they would reach the larger
society.
In what ways do you see that
happening, and
where is it falling short?
ALEX CUADROS, Author,
"Brazillionaires": Well,
look, I think that the Olympics
were pitched
to Brazilians as an excuse to
modernize all
of this woefully lacking
infrastructure in
Rio.
And some of the projects that
were built really
will help the population at
large.
A number of express bus lines
were created
that are going to be a big
benefit to the
working-class Brazilians who can
spend two-and-a-half-hours
commuting each way every day.
But Lulu talking about the
traffic, you know,
she brings up a really
interesting point,
which is, why were most of the
Olympic installations
put in this wealthy suburb known
as Barra
da Tijuca?
It's an area of the city where
only 300,000
people live, and where people
are generally
much wealthier than the rest of
the city.
Meanwhile, poorer areas of the
city like the
north side remain desperately in
need of public
works.
JEFFREY BROWN: Paulo Sotero, of
course, the
original idea also -- this goes
back to when
Brazil got the Olympics in 2009,
I think -- was
a kind of coming out party for
the country
on the world stage, right, to
present itself
as a major power and certainly
an economic
power?
Where does that -- how does that
look now?
PAULO SOTERO, Director, Brazil
Institute,
Wilson Center: Well, it looks
like the government
oversold the story, because that
really didn't
come to pass.
Brazil a few years after that
entered into
its most serious economic crisis
in a century.
Eleven million people lost their
jobs.
So the promise of the Olympics
didn't have
a chance.
At the same time, we know now
that people
in the government in the state
of Brazil were
involved in a criminal
organization, so says
the attorney general of the
country, stealing,
assaulting the largest Brazilian
company,
Petrobras, headquartered in Rio.
So, obviously, if we knew then
what we know
now, I believe most Brazilians
would have
been against hosting the
Olympics.
And now most Brazilians are
disappointed,
and not expecting much from the
Olympics.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, Lulu, let me
go back to
you in Rio.
One major issue, of course, is
security.
With all that's happened in
various cities
around the world over the past
months, how
big a threat is it there?
How seriously is it being taken?
LULU GARCIA-NAVARRO: I think
it's now being
taken extremely seriously, but,
again, as
with everything here, the
criticism is that
the Brazilian government took
the threat too
seriously too late.
If you look around the streets
of Rio de Janeiro
right now, it's a heavily
militarized city.
You have over 80,000 security
forces here.
That's twice the number of the
London Games.
And so you're not lacking for
security.
But certainly there are serious
questions
about how safe the venues are.
There were just questions today
about some
of the security measures at some
of the main
venues.
And so we still have to see
exactly how the
Brazilian government is going to
deal with
the very real threat of
terrorism.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, Alex Cuadros,
when you
look -- you have been looking at
the financial
state and the economic state of
the country
for the last decade or so.
Apart -- sports aside, what
would constitute
success for Brazil at this
point?
And what are the prospects?
ALEX CUADROS: Well, look, I
think that the
near term for Brazil is not
pretty.
You know, it's in the deepest
recession in
possibly a century.
Millions of jobs have been lost.
But, at the same time, I think
that Paulo
pointed to this moment when
there was this
amazing optimism about Brazil,
and I think
that people exaggerated then in
their euphoria
about Brazil's prospects as a
country.
And I think that, by the same
token, right
now, people may be exaggerating
in their pessimism.
So, it may be that we're
approaching, if we
haven't reached, the bottom of
the well, and
that simply by virtue of the
fact that we
have fallen so much in Brazil,
things are
going to start to bounce back.
JEFFREY BROWN: You mean
expectations are so
low at this point that perhaps
things will
look OK?
ALEX CUADROS: Well, look, you
know, the economy
has shrunk by so much that, when
there is
a rebound, it's going to be
significant, just
because of the base of
comparison.
And, you know, Brazil is not a
Venezuela.
We're not seeing kleptocracy on
the scale
that we see there.
This is a functioning country.
It's a diverse economy.
And I think that, at least in
the medium-term,
it's going to bounce back.
JEFFREY BROWN: It's also true,
Paulo Sotero,
that we have gone into many
other Olympics
thinking, oh, they're not ready,
this is going
to be a disaster, they're going
to have all
kinds of problems, only to see
some great
success.
So, what do you think the
prospects are here?
PAULO SOTERO: I think prospects
to have a
good Olympics is reasonable now.
JEFFREY BROWN: Reasonable?
PAULO SOTERO: Reasonable.
Do not underestimate the
capacity of Brazilians
in general and people from Rio
in particular
to throw a party.
And Cariocas, as we call them,
are famous
for that.
They have the Carnival every
year that are
great parties.
They happen on the clock.
And they are very
well-organized.
I believe also, as the athletes
converge,
you know, their effort, their
merits will
take over, and this will be a
story of the
real Olympics, but it will be,
above all,
a story about the Olympics.
This is a very positive,
interesting event.
People -- actually, tourists
coming to Rio
will be very warmly welcomed by
people.
They already are.
And, actually, they should
mingle with the
people.
They should go up to the hills
and be with
the people.
Actually, the best summer in
Brazil are up
in the (INAUDIBLE) in the
so-called slums.
This is a very generous and nice
people.
So, don't equate Rio and slums
with crime.
Yes, there's crime there, but,
as Lulu said,
heavy security for 15 days.
So, enjoy Rio.
Enjoy the Olympics.
JEFFREY BROWN: And, Lulu, just
20 seconds
here, just, is your sense that
people really
feel the weight of this, I mean,
that there's
a lot riding on this?
LULU GARCIA-NAVARRO: I feel that
they do feel
that there is a lot riding on
this, but they're
also very much ready for it to
be over.
There's been a huge buildup.
This has been a country that has
been going
through so many different
things, as we have
mentioned, economic, political
crises, the
World Cup just two years ago,
and now this.
So, I think Cariocas want this
to be a success,
but I also think that they very
much want
these Games to be over soon.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right, in the
meantime,
let them begin, right?
Lulu Garcia-Navarro, Alex
Cuadros, Paulo Sotero,
thank you, all three, very much.
PAULO SOTERO: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally, PBS will
be airing
three Olympic-themed
documentaries tonight.
One profiles the story of
Claressa Shields,
who comes from Flint, Michigan.
She goes by the nickname T-Rex,
and was 17
when she was the first U.S.
woman to ever
win boxing gold in 2012.
She hasn't lost since.
Tonight's "Independent Lens"
follows her rise,
but also looks at why she's
never gotten the
fame or endorsements that often
follow the
gold.
Here's a look.
ANTHONY BARTKOWSKI, USA Boxing:
I wanted to
pull us together and just talk
about a few
things of how we want to help
you and see
if there's other ways.
I know you're trying to get some
sponsorships
and endorsements, et cetera.
MAN: We see these other people
getting all
these big endorsements and all
that.
ANTHONY BARTKOWSKI: Claressa was
one of 46
gold medals for the U.S. team.
JULIE GOLDSTICKER, Did you even
sit down and
look at who from that group has
the huge endorsement
deals, it's Gabby Douglas and
her gym (INAUDIBLE)
and Ryan Lochte.
When you have somebody who was
in homes every
night on prime-time television
on national
television, the reality is
people see them.
So, what do we do to address
that situation?
I want every time you're on TV,
if a potential
sponsor sees you, for them be
drawn to you
and say, oh, I want to work with
that girl.
But we would love for you stop
saying that
you like beating people up and
making them
cry.
CLARESSA SHIELDS, Olympic Boxer:
You would
love me to stop saying that?
ANTHONY BARTKOWSKI: Yes.
Stop saying that.
CLARESSA SHIELDS: Why?
ANTHONY BARTKOWSKI: Because it
makes it seems
like you're a bully.
CLARESSA SHIELDS: When it comes
to somebody
wanting to get behind me and
say, I want this
person to represent my brand, I
box.
JULIE GOLDSTICKER: I understand
that.
MAN: I understand what you're
saying.
Just it's like an image thing.
You have to kind of tone it down
a little
bit.
JULIE GOLDSTICKER: I hear you
say so many
other things about being a role
model in your
community, wanting to be this
and that and
wanting to bring something
positive to Flint
and all of that.
ANTHONY BARTKOWSKI: Yes.
That all builds on it.
CLARESSA SHIELDS: OK.
I can reword that.
OK.
JULIE GOLDSTICKER: Just
something to think
about.
ANTHONY BARTKOWSKI: Reword that.
(LAUGHTER)
CLARESSA SHIELDS: I really
haven't been letting
people get in my ear.
They're all like, Gabby has
this, Gabby getting
that, Gabby, Gabby, Gabby.
OK.
She won a gold medal.
She won two of them.
I can't help what the society is
not doing.
Like, they ignore me, but they
love her.
Like, I can't help that.
If USA Boxing don't give me the
money, then
I won't -- I'm going pro.
I deserve what the males got.
I won a gold medal.
There's no way in the world that
I shouldn't
get paid the same.
It's not about money.
It's just about getting what you
deserve,
respect me as being a woman,
respect me as
being black, respect me as being
an athlete
who represented the United
States, you know?
That's what it's about.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You can watch the
entire "Independent
Lens" film, "T-Rex: Her Fight
for Gold."
That's tonight on most PBS
stations or streaming
now at PBS.org.
On the "NewsHour" online right
now: Would
a $15 minimum wage hurt the
economy?
On our Making Sense page, one
columnist looks
to wage hike examples in
Washington state
and sees little to fear.
All that and more is on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
GWEN IFILL: Tune in later
tonight on "Charlie
Rose": John Dickerson of CBS
News on the state
of the politics in America and
the fall election
season.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow
evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.